## Technical report on a Product Dataset
Feb 6, 2025
—
Introduction
This report outlines the data cleaning and preparation steps performed on a dataset containing product information. The objectives of this process were:
Create a concise product title.
Format column names.
Handle missing values.
The Steps included in data exploration and cleaning include
Data Loading and Initial Inspection
The dataset was loaded from an Excel file using pd.read_excel() after importing panda on Python.
An initial inspection of the data was conducted to understand the data structure, identify potential issues, and plan the cleaning steps.
This can be seen in the picture below

Data Cleaning and Transformation:
Short Title Creation:
A custom function (create_short_title) was defined to generate concise product titles.
The function extracts the first two, middle and last two words from the original title depending on the number of words.
For titles with fewer words, it extracts a shorter combination or the entire title.
Column Name Formatting:
Column names were converted to sentence case using df.columns.str.title().
Underscores were inserted between consecutive uppercase letters in the column names using
if ‘Producttypeid’ in df.columns:
df.rename(columns={‘Producttypeid’: ‘Product_Type_ID’}, inplace=True), for 3 columns.
Missing Value Handling:
The presence of the ‘Productlength’ column was checked.
If the column existed, missing values in ‘Productlength’ were filled with 0 using df['Productlength'].fillna(0). This approach was chosen for simplicity in this example. This was done for Producttypeid also, while bullet_point column was replaced with none using df[‘Bullet_Points’].fillna(‘None’).
Duplicates were also removed using df = df.drop_duplicates().

4. Results
The cleaned and transformed dataset was stored in the DataFrame df.
The df.head() method was used to display the first few rows of the DataFrame, showcasing the changes made to the data. These can be seen in the below
5. Conclusion
This report documents the data cleaning and preparation steps performed on the given dataset. The key transformations included creating a new ‘short_title’ column, formatting column names, and handling missing values in different columns.

